Healthcare workers have 7 times the risk of severe COVID-19
A study of severe COVID-19 in the United Kingdom reveals the risk that healthcare workers take to help others. Share on
Pinterest Win McNamee/Getty Images A new study in the journal Occupational & Environmental Medicine examines the risks
that “essential” and “nonessential” British workers will develop severe COVID-19. It suggests that healthcare workers
are seven times more likely to develop severe cases of COVID-19 than people with “nonessential” roles. Stay informed
with live updates on the current COVID-19 outbreak and visit our coronavirus hub for more advice on prevention and
treatment. Although it makes sense that people who interact with COVID-19 patients are at greater risk, this is the
first study to compare their risk of developing severe disease with that of other types of workers. As the study authors
conclude: “Our findings reinforce the need for adequate health and safety arrangements and provision of [personal
protective equipment] for essential workers, especially in the health and social care sectors. The health and well-being
of essential workers is critical to limiting the spread and managing the burden of global pandemics.”  Who took part in
the study? The researchers analyzed three sources of data: Public Health England COVID-19 test results  recorded deaths
from March 16, 2020 to July 26, 2020  UK Biobank study data covering the years 2006–2010 The UK Biobank data allowed the
researchers to track multiple factors that may be associated with the development of severe disease beyond one’s
occupation. A total of 120,075 employees, aged 49–64 years, were involved in the study. Black and Asian people, who are
more likely to be essential workers, comprised nearly 3% of the group. Around 32,127 employees, or 29% of the
participants, were essential workers. Healthcare workers made up 9% of the total cohort.  Social care and education
workers made up 11% of the total cohort.  Those with “other” jobs, including police and people in food preparation, made
up 9% of the total cohort. The team broke the “healthcare workers” category down further into: doctors and pharmacists,
or “healthcare professionals”  medical support staff  nurses and paramedics, or “health associate professionals”  social
care and transport workers For the purposes of the study, the researchers considered anyone with a hospital diagnosis of
COVID-19 and anyone who died of the disease to have a severe case. Of the total study group, 271 employees had severe
COVID-19.  Healthcare worker findings The healthcare workers category overall experienced an average of seven times as
many severe cases as nonessential workers. The study suggests that medical support staff are the most vulnerable. They
were nine times more likely to develop severe disease than people in nonessential occupations. People in the social care
and education category had an 84% higher risk, while those providing social care were 2.5 times more likely to have a
severe case of the disease. Transport workers were twice as likely to get seriously ill as nonessential workers, and the
risks for people in the “other” category, in general, were 60% higher.  A racial component The researchers’ analysis
revealed a racial disparity in the likelihood of having a severe case of the disease. This parallels the racial
imbalance in deaths from COVID-19. Black and Asian essential workers were eight times as likely to have severe cases as
white nonessential workers. Black and Asian nonessential employees were three times more likely to have severe cases
than their white counterparts. In addition, their severe case rates were roughly equivalent to those that white
essential workers experienced.