Gut microbiota: How does it interact with the brain?
Through studies in mice, researchers find evidence that having a healthful balance of gut microorganisms is important
for good health. Share on Pinterest Smith Collection/Gado/Getty Images Researchers from the Institut Pasteur, French
National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS), and Inserm have found evidence that gut microbiota also plays a role in
mood regulation and brain function. Gut microbiota is the community of bacteria, fungi, and viruses that live in the
digestive tract. These findings in mice suggest that changes to gut bacterial communities may lead or contribute to
depression. If humans have a similar mechanism, doctors might be able to use bacteria strains to treat mood disorders,
such as depression. A group of 16 researchers from several prominent French research institutions conducted the study,
which appears in Nature Communications.  Gut microbiota and mood Studies have found that some people with depression
experience dysbiosis, which is an imbalance or change in their intestinal microbiota. Research conducted on rodents also
shows that gut dysbiosis has associations with neurological changes linked with depression, such as: reduced adult
neurogenesis, or the growth of new brain cells  chronic low-grade inflammation  abnormal hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal
(HPA) axis (the body’s central stress response system) function Animal studies also show that gut microbiota helps
regulate anxiety. It may also influence the development of neurological conditions caused by circuit dysfunctions, such
as Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease, depression, and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Researchers think this is
because gut bacteria release metabolites, tiny bits of food broken down by digestion that influence brain function.
Metabolites may impact mood regulation by acting on the endocannabinoid system. The endocannabinoid system is a complex
cell-signaling system consisting of lipid (fat)-based neurotransmitters and their receptors. It is found throughout the
body and plays a role in important aspects of health, such as immune and nervous system function and cellular
communication in the nervous system. It also regulates emotions, moods, and stress responses by activation of the
system’s main receptor, CB1. Previous research supports the idea that restoring gut microbial health may help treat
depression. In animal studies, prebiotic treatment influenced emotional behavior. In human studies, prebiotic
supplementation also improved mood in people with depression. But despite educated theories, researchers still do not
know precisely how gut bacteria impact brain function. Researchers in the recent study set out to find the mechanisms
linking gut microbiota and mood disorders. A team of researchers from some of these same French institutions published a
report earlier this year, which found that stress-induced changes in gut microbiota reduced the efficacy of the
antidepressant fluoxetine in mice.