My experience of endometriosis as a Black woman
My name is Nadine Dirks; I am a 24-year-old woman from South Africa who has been living with stage 4 endometriosis for
over a decade.  Share on Pinterest I lived with endometriosis for over a decade before receiving a diagnosis for the
condition.  On average, endometriosis — a painful inflammatory disease most commonly of the ovaries, fallopian tubes,
uterus, and pelvic tissue — can take anywhere from 4–11 years before diagnosis occurs, with an average delay of nearly 7
years in women aged 18–45, according to an article in Current Obstetrics Gynecology Reports.  For a Black woman, this
can be even more daunting and stressful. Compared with white women, Black women are less likely to be diagnosed with
endometriosis.  I received an official diagnosis of endometriosis in 2014, after many years as an outpatient at the
local hospital. At the hospital — between misdiagnoses, assumptions that I was a hypochondriac, and assumptions that
went as far as suggesting my symptoms must be from an untreated sexually transmitted disease — no one showed any real
interest in getting to the bottom of what was causing my unrelenting symptoms.  At the time, I was experiencing severe
and heavy menses, chronic lower back pain, intense cramps, bloating, headaches, nausea, vomiting, fainting spells, and
chronic constipation — yet this was not enough to convince the doctors to look into my symptoms.  They brushed it off,
with one doctor going as far as assuming my insistent bleeding and intense pain was due to a “botched abortion gone
wrong” just by glancing at me from behind his desk.  He had not even done a physical examination before deciding the
fate of the then 18-year-old me.  Doctors consistently gave me paracetamol and ibuprofen and sent me home, insisting
that I was fine and nothing was wrong with me. Needless to say, the paracetamol and ibuprofen did very little, other
than pacifying my pain levels periodically.  The doctors had even gotten to a point where they insisted my weight was an
issue and the reason for my symptoms, but I only weighed 45 kgs, which was perfectly healthy for my height and age.  It
seemed as though each doctor took every opportunity to make assumptions, body shame, slut shame, and ridicule me,
instead of providing any actual help that may have provided some answers sooner.  One Sunday afternoon, I noticed the
pain on the right side of my body was worse, and my abdomen seemed bloated. I decided to rest, use a hot water bottle,
and take some pain medication to ease the discomfort.  When I woke up the next morning, the pain was much worse. I
decided to visit my general practitioner (GP), who insisted on writing a referral letter to my local hospital.  My GP
was concerned it might be my appendix and informed the hospital. I arrived, and they sent me for a battery of scans,
tests, and examinations to get to the bottom of the pain.  The doctors informed me that my appendix was perfectly fine.
However, I needed emergency surgery because they had seen an abnormally large mass on my right ovary.  At the time, they
had me sign a form stating they would need to remove the right ovary because it was under incredible strain due to the
mysterious mass.  The doctors informed my family it would be a 30-minute surgery, but after 2 hours, my family had still
not heard any word because I was still in the operating room.  The surgeons later informed me that once they had a look
to see what was happening internally – they had no choice but to open me up entirely, creating an incision from hip to
hip.  Aside from the mass they had spotted initially, my fallopian tubes were attached to my uterus, and my bowels were
stuck to the back of my uterus, which had caused it to pull downward.