Study finds new evidence of SARS-CoV-2 damaging brain blood vessels
Study design The study was conducted by researchers from the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
(NINDS) in Bethesda, MD, and other institutions across the United States. They examined post-mortem brain tissue samples
from 16 patients in New York City and from three patients in Iowa City who had died between March and July 2020 and
tested positive for COVID-19 before or after death. Patients ranged in age from 5 to 73 years, and their medical history
commonly showed preexisting conditions, including obesity, heart disease or high blood pressure, and diabetes. Before
death, treatment was mainly geared toward respiratory infection, and only two patients exhibited agitated delirium. The
researchers also used MRI images to detect any abnormalities in the brain tissue. This included the olfactory bulb, a
brain area involved in the sense of smell, since loss of smell is known to be one of the first symptoms of COVID-19.
Another brain region they examined was the brain stem, which is crucial for human survival. It regulates sleeping and
eating habits and controls heart rate and the rate of breathing. To asses the relevant brain tissues, the researchers
used a staining method called immunohistochemistry, which allows the visualization of proteins within cells and tissues.
Results Of the 19 brain tissue samples, 13 were imaged, and 10 showed brain anomalies. Further analysis showed blood
vessel damage. In nine patients, the presence of lesions suggested they were leaky brain vessel injuries. There were
also signs of a leaking blood protein called fibrinogen in the brain. The authors suggest that this is evidence of
inflammation that arises from an overreactive immune system fighting infection. In 10 patients, MRI images showed
hypointensities corresponding to congested blood vessels, and an accumulation of fibrinogen around the area. “Our
results suggest that this may be caused by the body’s inflammatory response to the virus,” says Dr. Avindra Nath,
clinical director of the NINDS at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and senior author of the study. Interestingly,
the SARS-CoV-2 virus was not found in any of the patients’ brain tissue. However, the authors write that there is no way
of knowing whether the virus was present at one point: “It is possible that the virus was cleared by the time of death
or that viral copy numbers were below the level of detection by our assays.” When looking at the spots of injury more
closely, the researchers found that immune cells, such as T cells, were present around the brain, further supporting
evidence of an inflammatory response in the brain. “We were completely surprised. Originally, we expected to see damage
that is caused by a lack of oxygen,” says Dr. Nath. “Instead, we saw multifocal areas of damage that is usually
associated with strokes and neuroinflammatory diseases.” Because the novel coronavirus was not detected in the brain
tissue of the deceased patients, the authors say it is too early to tell whether there is a link between the
neurological effects associated with COVID-19 and the blood vessel injuries observed in this study. “In the future, we
plan to study how COVID-19 harms the brain’s blood vessels and whether that produces some of the short- and long-term
symptoms we see in patients,” says Dr. Nath.